# Effects of Hypoxia on _Hemigrapsus oregonensis_ - Research Synopsis 

Over the past decades hypoxic events along the western coast of the United States have steadily increased. These events are the result of climate change, specifically changing wind patterns and eutrophication. With changing wind patterns there has been increased upwelling bringing deep low-oxygen water up to the surface. Climate change has also caused an increase in algal blooms due to raised water temperatures. As these algae die off their organic matter is broken down, a process which utilizes oxygen and takes it out of the water. Hypoxic water, or water with low oxygen concentrations, can be harmful if not lethal to marine organisms. In recent years crab industries have reported a decline in their overall catch and revenue which has been linked to hypoxia events. The goal of this research is to look at _Hemigrapsus oregonensis_, or the hairy shore crab, and use it as a model organism to examine how hypoxia may be impacting harvested crabs at both the intertidal and deep water level. Knowing exactly to what extent and how hypoxia impacts crabs can allow for more accurate population predictions which may inform management policies for the crab industry to adapt or be better prepared for hypoxic events. We hypothesized hypoxia would decrease the crabs respiration and as a result have increased lactate levels from the switch of aerobic to anaerobic respiration. We also hypothesized there would be evidence of gill tissue atrophy which is commonly seen in marine organisms living in hypoxic waters. Finally, we also hypothesized that crabs living in the intertidal with access to the surface will combat the effects of hypoxia better than deepwater individuals. To test our hypotheses we created two experimental tanks and one control. The intertidal group had no airstone, a loosely placed lid, and a ramp with access to the surface. The deepwater group had a tightly sealed lid, no airstone, and no access to the surface. After one week half of the crabs were subjected to two non-lethal tests; resazurin assay and righting. After two weeks all crabs had the resazurin, righting test, hemolymph extraction for lactate, and gill dissections performed. Only crabs alive after the two week treatment were tested with resazurin, righting, and hemolymph. The deepwater treatment had 100% mortality after two weeks and only had gill tissues examined. For our test we found both treatment groups had significantly increased rates of respiration compared to the control and significantly lower lactate levels. The gill tissues of the deepwater treatment showed severe signs of atrophy as well as the intertidal treatment whereas the control group had healthy gills. These results suggest the crabs have had a shift in their oxygen uptake, the high respiration suggesting an attempt to increase oxygen uptake and the low lactate indicating some physiological shift. The gill tissue and mortality rates also follow our hypothesis that the intertidal crabs do perform better under hypoxic conditions. Overall the data does support that crabs respiration, lactate, and gill tissue are being impacted by hypoxia. Access to the surface may be an important factor for their survival, but overall the effects can be deadly. With this data and further research we may be able to predict how crab populations will be impacted during hypoxic events and put in place management strategies to combat revenue loss for the crab industry.
